Travelling together across the lunar surface in a comfortable, fully enclosed, wheeled vehicle, a number of astronauts arrive to the site of a lava tube on the moon that has been selected for further exploration as a possible mining and/or habitation location.  They park the Space Exploration Vehicle (SEV) just outside the opening where they will enter the tube.  Two astronauts exit the vehicle wearing space suits and deploy a communications device just inside the entrance to the cavernous tube, where once a mass of lava passed during an ancient eruption.  Now little of the substance of that lava remains here, because the bulk of it moved on, melting its way across the surface, leaving a shell of rock where the outer layers cooled, and a hollow interior left behind as the mass of molten minerals passed through.  The communications device will serve as a base station to link the SEV to the astronauts as they explore the depths of the tunnel system, and move out of line of sight with the vehicle on the surface. 
 
The two astronauts travel together, bounding carefully forward into the tunnel in that strange fashion that works to move humans along when they walk in the low gravity of the moon, just a sixth of the normal gravity of the Earth.  Accompanying them are a pair of robots, cargo carriers laden with equipment and supplies for the day's journey into the cave and back.  Each astronaut's spacesuit has an array of sensors monitoring the health of it's wearer, basic vital signs and measures of exertion, suit integrity and motion and environmental sensors that report data such as geoposition and radiation levels.  These data are presented on a computer display embedded into one of the suit's gloves and sent by radio to the SEV by way of the base station.  Radio doesn't travel well through rock, and not at all through very thick rock, but so long as the explorers remain in range of the base station, they can maintain a link to their colleagues on the surface.  In order to proceed further into the winding tunnel, however, they have another technique.  Mounted on one arm is a device that dispenses radio tags, small electronic devices that are attached to the walls of the tunnel at suitable intervals to relay messages between one another and eventually to the base station.  The astronauts leave these tags behind as they go, like the bread crumbs left behind in the story of Hansel and Gretel, and the radio messages can find their way out of the cavern.
 
Further into the cave tunnel, the astronauts come to a place where the tube divides into two paths.  They mark the junction with a radio tag, and each explores one of the branches alone, accompanied only by a trusty robot.  Though separated by solid rock as they proceed, they remain in contact with each other and with the topside SEV thanks to the radio relay tags they have been mounting to the walls.  Using the glove mounted computer and display, they can keep tabs on each other's telemetry, that of the two robots, and of the astronauts keeping watch from above.  Laser scanners on the robots measure and map the walls as they go, and report the results to the server in the base station.  The two explorers push as far into the cavern as the mission allows on the first day, then return to the surface, leaving the network of tags, seismometers, and other equipment inside.
